=pod

=head1 NAME

asn1octetstream - ASN.1 octet stream PEM encryption tool

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<openssl> B<asn1octetstream>
[B<-in filename>]
[B<-passin arg>]
[B<-out filename>]
[B<-passout arg>]
[B<-e>]
[B<-d>]
[B<-<algo>>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<asn1octetstream> command encapsulates arbitrary binary data in ASN.1 octet strings
and stores them, optionally (usually) encrypted, in PEM format.
It also handles conversion of the PEM encoding, such as changing
the passphrase and crypto type.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-<algo>>

If writing PEM output, write it in a symmetrically encrypted
manner, with B<algo> as cryptographic algorithm.
This option is highly recommended.
See the B<list-cipher-commands>
command for a list of valid ciphers.

=item B<-d>

Instead of writing a PEM encoded ASN.1 octet string to the
output stream, write the binary data content of it.

=item B<-e>

Instead of expecting a PEM encoded ASN.1 octet string on the
input stream, read arbitrary binary data (up to 2 GiB - 1 Byte)
and encapsulate it into an ASN.1 octet stream for further processing.

=item B<-in filename>

the input file, default is standard input

=item B<-out filename>

output file to place the DER encoded data into. If this
option is not present then no data will be output. This is most useful when
combined with the B<-strparse> option.

=back

=head1 NOTES

The PEM encapsulation format uses the header and footer lines:

 -----BEGIN ASN1 OCTET STRING-----
 -----END ASN1 OCTET STRING-----  

This format is a MirBSD extension.
The MirOS Project hopes this will some day be integrated into stock OpenSSL.

=cut
