@c Generated automatically from crt.pas
@c DO NOT CHANGE THIS FILE MANUALLY!

@smallexample
@{ CRT (Crt Replacement Tool)
  Portable BP compatible CRT unit for GPC with many extensions

  This unit is aware of terminal types. This means programs using
  this unit will work whether run locally or while being logged in
  remotely from a system with a completely different terminal type
  (as long as the appropriate terminfo entry is present on the
  system where the program is run).

  NOTES:

  - The CRT unit needs the ncurses and panel libraries which should
    be available for almost any system. For Dos systems, where
    ncurses is not available, it is configured to use the PDCurses
    and its panel library instead. On Unix systems with X11, it can
    also use PDCurses (xcurses) and xpanel to produce X11 programs.
    The advantage is that the program won't need an xterm with a
    valid terminfo entry, the output may look a little nicer and
    function keys work better than in an xterm, but the disadvantage
    is that it will only run under X. The ncurses and PDCurses
    libraries (including panel and xpanel, resp.) can be found in
    http://www.gnu-pascal.de/libs/
    (Note that ncurses is already installed on many Unix systems.)
    For ncurses, version 5.0 or newer is required.

    When an X11 version under Unix is wanted, give @samp{-DX11} when
    compiling crt.pas and crtc.c (or when compiling crt.pas or a
    program that uses CRT with @samp{--automake}). On pre-X11R6 systems,
    give @samp{-DNOX11R6} additionally. You might also have to give the
    path to the X11 libraries with @samp{-L}, e.g. @samp{-L /usr/X11/lib}.

  - A few features cannot be implemented in a portable way and are
    only available on some systems:

      Sound, NoSound 1)                  -----------------------.
      GetShiftState                      ------------------.    |
      TextMode etc. 2)                   -------------.    |    |
      CRTSavePreviousScreen              --------.    |    |    |
      Interrupt signal (Ctrl-C) handling ---.    |    |    |    |
                                            |    |    |    |    |
    Linux/IA32 3) (terminal)                X    X 4) X 5) X 6) X 6)
    Other Unix (terminal)                   X    X 7) X 5) -    -
    Unix (X11 version)                      X    X    -    X    -
    Dos (DJGPP)                             X    X    X    X    X
    MS-Windows (Cygwin, mingw, MSYS)        X    -    X 8) X    -

    Notes:

    1) If you define NO_CRT_DUMMY_SOUND while compiling CRT, you
       will get linking errors when your program tries to use
       Sound/NoSound on a platform where it's not supported (which
       is useful to detect at compile time if playing sound is a
       major task of your program). Otherwise, Sound/NoSound will
       simply do nothing (which is usually acceptable if the program
       uses these routines just for an occasional beep).

    2) Changing to monochrome modes works on all platforms. Changing
       the screen size only works on those indicated. However, even
       on the platforms not supported, the program will react to
       screen size changes by external means (e.g. changing the
       window size with the mouse if running in a GUI window or
       resizing a console or virtual terminal).

    3) Probably also on other processors, but I've had no chance to
       test this yet.

    4) Only on a local console with access permissions to the
       corresponding virtual console memory device or using the
       @samp{crtscreen} utility (see crtscreen.c in the demos directory).

    5) Only if supported by an external command (e.g., in xterms and
       on local Linux consoles). The command to be called can be
       defined in the environment variable @samp{RESIZETERM} (where the
       variables @samp{columns} and @samp{lines} in the command are set to the
       size wanted). If not set, the code will try @samp{resize -s} in an
       xterm and otherwise @samp{SVGATextMode} and @samp{setfont}. For this to
       work, these utilities need to be present in the PATH or
       @samp{/usr/sbin} or @samp{/usr/local/sbin}. Furthermore, SVGATextMode
       and setfont require root permissions, either to the
       executable of the program compiled with CRT or to resizecons
       (called by setfont) or SVGATextMode. To allow the latter, do
       "chmod u+s `which resizecons`" and/or
       "chmod u+s `which SVGATextMode`", as root once, but only if
       you really want each user to be allowed to change the text
       mode.

    6) Only on local consoles.

    7) Some terminals only. Most xterms etc. support it as well as
       other terminals that support an "alternate screen" in the
       smcup/rmcup terminal capabilities.

    8) Only with PDCurses, not with ncurses. Changing the number of
       screen *columns* doesn't work in a full-screen session.

  - When CRT is initialized (automatically or explicitly; see the
    comments for CRTInit), the screen is cleared, and at the end of
    the program, the cursor is placed at the bottom of the screen
    (curses behaviour).

  - All the other things (including most details like color and
    function key constants) are compatible with BP's CRT unit, and
    there are many extensions that BP's unit does not have.

  - When the screen size is changed by an external event (e.g.,
    resizing an xterm or changing the screen size from another VC
    under Linux), the virtual "function key" kbScreenSizeChanged is
    returned. Applications can use the virtual key to resize their
    windows. kbScreenSizeChanged will not be returned if the screen
    size change was initiated by the program itself (by using
    TextMode or SetScreenSize). Note that TextMode sets the current
    panel to the full screen size, sets the text attribute to the
    default and clears the window (BP compatibility), while
    SetScreenSize does not.

  - After the screen size has been changed, whether by using
    TextMode, SetScreenSize or by an external event, ScreenSize will
    return the new screen size. The current window and all panels
    will have been adjusted to the new screen size. This means, if
    their right or lower ends are outside the new screen size, the
    windows are moved to the left and/or top as far as necessary. If
    this is not enough, i.e., if they are wider/higher than the new
    screen size, they are shrinked to the total screen width/height.
    When the screen size is enlarged, window sizes are not changed,
    with one exception: Windows that extend through the whole screen
    width/height are enlarged to the whole new screen width/height
    (in particular, full-screen windows remain full-screen). This
    behaviour might not be optimal for all purposes, but you can
    always resize your windows in your application after the screen
    size change.

  - (ncurses only) The environment variable @samp{ESCDELAY} specifies the
    number of milliseconds allowed between an @samp{Esc} character and
    the rest of an escape sequence (default 1000). Setting it to a
    value too small can cause problems with programs not recognizing
    escape sequences such as function keys, especially over slow
    network connections. Setting it to a value too large can delay
    the recognition of an @samp{ESC} key press notably. On local Linux
    consoles, e.g., 10 seems to be a good value.

  - When trying to write portable programs, don't rely on exactly
    the same look of your output and the availability of all the key
    combinations. Some kinds of terminals support only some of the
    display attributes and special characters, and usually not all
    of the keys declared are really available. Therefore, it's safer
    to provide the same function on different key combinations and
    to not use the more exotic ones.

  - CRT supports an additional modifier key (if present), called
    @samp{Extra}. On DJGPP, it's the <Scroll Lock> key, under X11 it's
    the modifier #4, and on a local Linux console, it's the @samp{CtrlL}
    modifier (value 64) which is unused on many keytabs and can be
    mapped to any key(s), e.g. to those keys on new keyboards with
    these ugly symbols waiting to be replaced by penguins (keycodes
    125 and 127) by inserting the following two lines into your
    /etc/default.keytab and reloading the keytab with @samp{loadkeys}
    (you usually have to do this as root):

    keycode 125 = CtrlL
    keycode 127 = CtrlL

  Copyright (C) 1998-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

  Author: Frank Heckenbach <frank@@pascal.gnu.de>

  This file is part of GNU Pascal.

  GNU Pascal is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
  by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your
  option) any later version.

  GNU Pascal is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
  WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
  General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
  along with GNU Pascal; see the file COPYING. If not, write to the
  Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA
  02111-1307, USA.

  As a special exception, if you link this file with files compiled
  with a GNU compiler to produce an executable, this does not cause
  the resulting executable to be covered by the GNU General Public
  License. This exception does not however invalidate any other
  reasons why the executable file might be covered by the GNU
  General Public License.

  Please also note the license of the curses library used. @}

@{$gnu-pascal,I-@}
@{$if __GPC_RELEASE__ < 20030722@}
@{$error This unit requires GPC release 20030722 or newer.@}
@{$endif@}

unit @{$ifdef THIS_IS_WINCRT@} WinCRT @{$else@} CRT @{$endif@};

interface

uses GPC;

const
  @{ CRT modes @}
  BW40          = 0;            @{ 40x25 Black/White @}
  CO40          = 1;            @{ 40x25 Color @}
  BW80          = 2;            @{ 80x25 Black/White @}
  CO80          = 3;            @{ 80x25 Color @}
  Mono          = 7;            @{ 80x25 Black/White @}
  Font8x8       = 256;          @{ Add-in for 80x43 or 80x50 mode @}

  @{ Mode constants for Turbo Pascal 3.0 compatibility @}
  C40           = CO40;
  C80           = CO80;

  @{ Foreground and background color constants @}
  Black         = 0;
  Blue          = 1;
  Green         = 2;
  Cyan          = 3;
  Red           = 4;
  Magenta       = 5;
  Brown         = 6;
  LightGray     = 7;

  @{ Foreground color constants @}
  DarkGray      = 8;
  LightBlue     = 9;
  LightGreen    = 10;
  LightCyan     = 11;
  LightRed      = 12;
  LightMagenta  = 13;
  Yellow        = 14;
  White         = 15;

  @{ Add-in for blinking @}
  Blink         = 128;

type
  TTextAttr = Byte;

var
  @{ If False (default: True), catch interrupt signals (SIGINT;
    Ctrl-C), and other flow control characters as well as SIGTERM,
    SIGHUP and perhaps other signals @}
  CheckBreak: Boolean = True; attribute (name = 'crt_CheckBreak');

  @{ If True (default : False), replace Ctrl-Z by #0 in input @}
  CheckEOF: Boolean = False; attribute (name = 'crt_CheckEOF');

  @{ Ignored -- meaningless here @}
  DirectVideo: Boolean = True;

  @{ Ignored -- curses or the terminal driver will take care of that
    when necessary @}
  CheckSnow: Boolean = False;

  @{ Current (sic!) text mode @}
  LastMode: CCardinal = 3; attribute (name = 'crt_LastMode');

  @{ Current text attribute @}
  TextAttr: TTextAttr = 7; attribute (name = 'crt_TextAttr');

  @{ Window upper left coordinates. *Obsolete*! Please see WindowMin
    below. @}
  WindMin: CCardinal = High (CCardinal); attribute (name
  = 'crt_WindMin');

  @{ Window lower right coordinates. *Obsolete*! Please see WindowMax
    below. @}
  WindMax: CCardinal = High (CCardinal); attribute (name
  = 'crt_WindMax');

procedure AssignCRT (var f: Text);
function  KeyPressed: Boolean; external name 'crt_KeyPressed';
function  ReadKey: Char; external name 'crt_ReadKey';

@{ Not effective on all platforms, see above. See also SetScreenSize
  and SetMonochrome. @}
procedure TextMode (Mode: Integer);

procedure Window (x1, y1, x2, y2: CInteger); external
  name 'crt_Window';
procedure GotoXY (x, y: CInteger); external name 'crt_GotoXY';
function  WhereX: CInteger; external name 'crt_WhereX';
function  WhereY: CInteger; external name 'crt_WhereY';
procedure ClrScr; external name 'crt_ClrScr';
procedure ClrEOL; external name 'crt_ClrEOL';
procedure InsLine; external name 'crt_InsLine';
procedure DelLine; external name 'crt_DelLine';
procedure TextColor (Color: TTextAttr);
procedure TextBackground (Color: TTextAttr);
procedure LowVideo;
procedure HighVideo;
procedure NormVideo;
procedure Delay (MS: CCardinal); external name 'crt_Delay';

@{ Not available on all platforms, see above @}
procedure Sound (Hz: CCardinal); external name 'crt_Sound';
procedure NoSound; external name 'crt_NoSound';

@{ =================== Extensions over BP's CRT =================== @}

@{ Initializes the CRT unit. Should be called before using any of
  CRT's routines.

  Note: For BP compatibility, CRT is initizalized automatically when
  (almost) any of its routines are used for the first time. In this
  case, some defaults are set to match BP more closely. In
  particular, the PC charset (see SetPCCharSet) is enabled then
  (disabled otherwise), and the update level (see SetCRTUpdate) is
  set to UpdateRegularly (UpdateWaitInput otherwise). This feature
  is meant for BP compatibility *only*. Don't rely on it when
  writing a new program. Use CRTInit then, and set the defaults to
  the values you want explicitly.

  SetCRTUpdate is one of those few routines which will not cause CRT
  to be initialized immediately, and a value set with it will
  survive both automatic and explicit initialization, so you can use
  it to set the update level without caring which way CRT will be
  initialized. (This does not apply to SetPCCharSet. Since it works
  on a per-panel basis, it has to initialize CRT first, so there is
  a panel to start with.)

  If you terminate the program before calling CRTInit or any routine
  that causes automatic initialization, curses will never be
  initialized, so e.g., the screen won't be cleared. This can be
  useful, e.g., to check the command line arguments (or anything
  else) and if there's a problem, write an error and abort. Just be
  sure to write the error to StdErr, not Output (because Output will
  be assigned to CRT, and therefore writing to Output will cause CRT
  to be initialized, and because errors belong to StdErr, anyway),
  and to call @samp{RestoreTerminal (True)} before (just to be sure, in
  case some code -- perhaps added later, or hidden in the
  initialization of some unit -- does initialize CRT). @}
procedure CRTInit; external name 'crt_Init';

@{ Changes the input and output file and the terminal description CRT
  uses. Only effective with ncurses, and only if called before CRT
  is initialized (automatically or explicitly; see the comments for
  CRTInit). If TerminalType is nil, the default will be used. If
  InputFile and/or OutputFile are Null, they remain unchanged. @}
procedure CRTSetTerminal (TerminalType: CString; var InputFile,
  OutputFile: AnyFile); attribute (name = 'crt_SetTerminal');

@{ If called with an argument True, it causes CRT to save the
  previous screen contents if possible (see the comments at the
  beginning of the unit), and restore them when calling
  RestoreTerminal (True). After RestoreTerminal (False), they're
  saved again, and at the end of the program, they're restored. If
  called with an argument False, it will prohibit this behaviour.
  The default, if this procedure is not called, depends on the
  terminal (generally it is active on most xterms and similar and
  not active on most other terminals).

  This procedure should be called before initializing CRT (using
  CRTInit or automatically), otherwise the previous screen contents
  may already have been overwritten. It has no effect under XCurses,
  because the program uses its own window, anyway. @}
procedure CRTSavePreviousScreen (On: Boolean); external
  name 'crt_SavePreviousScreen';

@{ Returns True if CRTSavePreviousScreen was called with argument
  True and the functionality is really available. Note that the
  result is not reliable until CRT is initialized, while
  CRTSavePreviousScreen should be called before CRT is initialized.
  That's why they are two separate routines. @}
function  CRTSavePreviousScreenWorks: Boolean; external
  name 'crt_SavePreviousScreenWorks';

@{ If CRT is initialized automatically, not via CRTInit, and
  CRTAutoInitProc is not nil, it will be called before actually
  initializing CRT. @}
var
  CRTAutoInitProc: procedure = nil; attribute (name
  = 'crt_AutoInitProc');

@{ Aborts with a runtime error saying that CRT was not initialized.
  If you set CRTAutoInitProc to this procedure, you can effectively
  disable CRT's automatic initialization. @}
procedure CRTNotInitialized; attribute (name
  = 'crt_NotInitialized');

@{ Set terminal to shell or curses mode. An internal procedure
  registered by CRT via RegisterRestoreTerminal does this as well,
  so CRTSetCursesMode has to be called only in unusual situations,
  e.g. after executing a process that changes terminal modes, but
  does not restore them (e.g. because it crashed or was killed), and
  the process was not executed with the Execute routine, and
  RestoreTerminal was not called otherwise. If you set it to False
  temporarily, be sure to set it back to True before doing any
  further CRT operations, otherwise the result may be strange. @}
procedure CRTSetCursesMode (On: Boolean); external
  name 'crt_SetCursesMode';

@{ Do the same as @samp{RestoreTerminal (True)}, but also clear the screen
  after restoring the terminal (except for XCurses, because the
  program uses its own window, anyway). Does not restore and save
  again the previous screen contents if CRTSavePreviousScreen was
  called. @}
procedure RestoreTerminalClearCRT; attribute (name
  = 'crt_RestoreTerminalClearCRT');

@{ Keyboard and character graphics constants -- BP compatible! =:-@}
@{$i crt.inc@}

var
  @{ Tells whether the XCurses version of CRT is used @}
  XCRT: Boolean = @{$ifdef XCURSES@} True @{$else@} False @{$endif@};
  attribute (name = 'crt_XCRT');

  @{ If True (default: False), the Beep procedure and writing #7 do a
    Flash instead @}
  VisualBell: Boolean = False; attribute (name = 'crt_VisualBell');

  @{ Cursor shape codes. Only to be used in very special cases. @}
  CursorShapeHidden: CInteger = 0; attribute (name
  = 'crt_CursorShapeHidden');
  CursorShapeNormal: CInteger = 1; attribute (name
  = 'crt_CursorShapeNormal');
  CursorShapeFull:   CInteger = 2; attribute (name
  = 'crt_CursorShapeFull');

type
  TKey = CCardinal;

  TCursorShape = (CursorIgnored, CursorHidden, CursorNormal,
  CursorFat, CursorBlock);

  TCRTUpdate = (UpdateNever, UpdateWaitInput, UpdateInput,
                UpdateRegularly, UpdateAlways);

  TPoint = record
    x, y: CInteger
  end;

  PCharAttr = ^TCharAttr;
  TCharAttr = record
    ch       : Char;
    Attr     : TTextAttr;
    PCCharSet: Boolean
  end;

  PCharAttrs = ^TCharAttrs;
  TCharAttrs = array [1 .. MaxVarSize div SizeOf (TCharAttr)] of
  TCharAttr;

  TWindowXYInternalCard8 = Cardinal attribute (Size = 8);
  TWindowXYInternalFill = Integer attribute (Size = BitSizeOf
  (CCardinal) - 16);
  TWindowXY = packed record
    @{$ifdef __BYTES_BIG_ENDIAN__@}
    Fill: TWindowXYInternalFill;
    y, x: TWindowXYInternalCard8
    @{$elif defined (__BYTES_LITTLE_ENDIAN__)@}
    x, y: TWindowXYInternalCard8;
    Fill: TWindowXYInternalFill
    @{$else@}
    @{$error Endianness is not defined!@}
    @{$endif@}
  end;

@{ Make sure TWindowXY really has the same size as WindMin and
  WindMax. The value of the constant will always be True, and is of
  no further interest. @}
const
  AssertTWindowXYSize = CompilerAssert ((SizeOf (TWindowXY) = SizeOf
  (WindMin)) and
                                        (SizeOf (TWindowXY) = SizeOf
  (WindMax)));

var
  @{ Window upper and left coordinates. More comfortable to access
    than WindMin, but also *obsolete*. WindMin and WindowMin still
    work, but have the problem that they implicitly limit the window
    size to 255x255 characters. Though that's not really small for a
    text window, it's easily possible to create bigger ones (e.g. in
    an xterm with a small font, on a high resolution screen and/or
    extending over several virutal desktops). When using coordinates
    greater than 254, the corresponding bytes in WindowMin/WindowMax
    will be set to 254, so, e.g., programs which do
    @samp{Inc (WindowMin.x)} will not fail quite as badly (but probably
    still fail). The routines Window and GetWindow use Integer
    coordinates, and don't suffer from any of these problems, so
    they should be used instead. @}
  WindowMin: TWindowXY absolute WindMin;

  @{ Window lower right coordinates. More comfortable to access than
    WindMax, but also *obsolete* (see the comments for WindowMin).
    Use Window and GetWindow instead. @}
  WindowMax: TWindowXY absolute WindMax;

  @{ The attribute set by NormVideo @}
  NormAttr: TTextAttr = 7; attribute (name = 'crt_NormAttr');

  @{ Tells whether the current mode is monochrome @}
  IsMonochrome: Boolean = False; attribute (name
  = 'crt_IsMonochrome');

  @{ This value can be set to a combination of the shFoo constants
    and will be ORed to the actual shift state returned by
    GetShiftState. This can be used to easily simulate shift keys on
    systems where they can't be accessed. @}
  VirtualShiftState: CInteger = 0; attribute (name
  = 'crt_VirtualShiftState');

@{ Returns the size of the screen. Note: In BP's WinCRT unit,
  ScreenSize is a variable. But since writing to it from a program
  is pointless, anyway, providing a function here should not cause
  any incompatibility. @}
function  ScreenSize: TPoint; attribute (name
  = 'crt_GetScreenSize');

@{ Change the screen size if possible. @}
procedure SetScreenSize (x, y: CInteger); external
  name 'crt_SetScreenSize';

@{ Turns colors off or on. @}
procedure SetMonochrome (Monochrome: Boolean); external
  name 'crt_SetMonochrome';

@{ Tell which modifier keys are currently pressed. The result is a
  combination of the shFoo constants defined in crt.inc, or 0 on
  systems where this function is not supported -- but note
  VirtualShiftState. If supported, ReadKey automatically converts
  kbIns and kbDel keys to kbShIns and kbShDel, resp., if shift is
  pressed. @}
function  GetShiftState: CInteger; external
  name 'crt_GetShiftState';

@{ Get the extent of the current window. Use this procedure rather
  than reading WindMin and WindMax or WindowMin and WindowMax, since
  this routine allows for window sizes larger than 255. The
  resulting coordinates are 1-based (like in Window, unlike WindMin,
  WindMax, WindowMin and WindowMax). Any of the parameters may be
  Null in case you're interested in only some of the coordinates. @}
procedure GetWindow (var x1, y1, x2, y2: Integer); attribute (name
  = 'crt_GetWindow');

@{ Determine when to update the screen. The possible values are the
  following. The given conditions *guarantee* updates. However,
  updates may occur more frequently (even if the update level is set
  to UpdateNever). About the default value, see the comments for
  CRTInit.

  UpdateNever    : never (unless explicitly requested with
                   CRTUpdate)
  UpdateWaitInput: before Delay and CRT input, unless typeahead is
                   detected
  UpdateInput    : before Delay and CRT input
  UpdateRegularly: before Delay and CRT input and otherwise in
                   regular intervals without causing too much
                   refresh. This uses a timer on some systems
                   (currently, Unix with ncurses). This was created
                   for BP compatibility, but for many applications,
                   a lower value causes less flickering in the
                   output, and additionally, timer signals won't
                   disturb other operations. Under DJGPP, this
                   always updates immediately, but this fact should
                   not mislead DJGPP users into thinking this is
                   always so.
  UpdateAlways   : after each output. This can be very slow. (Not so
                   under DJGPP, but this fact should not mislead
                   DJGPP users ...) @}
procedure SetCRTUpdate (UpdateLevel: TCRTUpdate); external
  name 'crt_SetUpdateLevel';

@{ Do an update now, independently of the update level @}
procedure CRTUpdate; external name 'crt_Update';

@{ Do an update now and completely redraw the screen @}
procedure CRTRedraw; external name 'crt_Redraw';

@{ Return Ord (key) for normal keys and $100 * Ord (fkey) for
  function keys @}
function  ReadKeyWord: TKey; external name 'crt_ReadKeyWord';

@{ Extract the character and scan code from a TKey value @}
function  Key2Char (k: TKey): Char;
function  Key2Scan (k: TKey): Char;

@{ Convert a key to upper/lower case if it is a letter, leave it
  unchanged otherwise @}
function  UpCaseKey (k: TKey): TKey;
function  LoCaseKey (k: TKey): TKey;

@{ Return key codes for the combination of the given key with Ctrl,
  Alt, AltGr or Extra, resp. Returns 0 if the combination is
  unknown. @}
function  CtrlKey  (ch: Char): TKey; attribute (name
  = 'crt_CtrlKey');
function  AltKey   (ch: Char): TKey; external name 'crt_AltKey';
function  AltGrKey (ch: Char): TKey; external name 'crt_AltGrKey';
function  ExtraKey (ch: Char): TKey; external name 'crt_ExtraKey';

@{ Check if k is a pseudo key generated by a deadly signal trapped @}
function  IsDeadlySignal (k: TKey): Boolean;

@{ Produce a beep or a screen flash @}
procedure Beep; external name 'crt_Beep';
procedure Flash; external name 'crt_Flash';

@{ Get size of current window (calculated using GetWindow) @}
function  GetXMax: Integer;
function  GetYMax: Integer;

@{ Get/goto an absolute position @}
function  WhereXAbs: Integer;
function  WhereYAbs: Integer;
procedure GotoXYAbs (x, y: Integer);

@{ Turn scrolling on or off @}
procedure SetScroll (State: Boolean); external name 'crt_SetScroll';

@{ Read back whether scrolling is enabled @}
function  GetScroll: Boolean; external name 'crt_GetScroll';

@{ Determine whether to interpret non-ASCII characters as PC ROM
  characters (True), or in a system dependent way (False). About the
  default, see the comments for CRTInit. @}
procedure SetPCCharSet (PCCharSet: Boolean); external
  name 'crt_SetPCCharSet';

@{ Read back the value set by SetPCCharSet @}
function  GetPCCharSet: Boolean; external name 'crt_GetPCCharSet';

@{ Determine whether to interpret #7, #8, #10, #13 as control
  characters (True, default), or as graphics characters (False) @}
procedure SetControlChars (UseControlChars: Boolean); external
  name 'crt_SetControlChars';

@{ Read back the value set by SetControlChars @}
function  GetControlChars: Boolean; external
  name 'crt_GetControlChars';

procedure SetCursorShape (Shape: TCursorShape); external
  name 'crt_SetCursorShape';
function  GetCursorShape: TCursorShape; external
  name 'crt_GetCursorShape';

procedure HideCursor;
procedure HiddenCursor;
procedure NormalCursor;
procedure FatCursor;
procedure BlockCursor;
procedure IgnoreCursor;

@{ Simulates a block cursor by writing a block character onto the
  cursor position. The procedure automatically finds the topmost
  visible panel whose shape is not CursorIgnored and places the
  simulated cursor there (just like the hardware cursor), with
  matching attributes, if the cursor shape is CursorFat or
  CursorBlock (otherwise, no simulated cursor is shown).

  Calling this procedure again makes the simulated cursor disappear.
  In particular, to get the effect of a blinking cursor, you have to
  call the procedure repeatedly (say, 8 times a second). CRT will
  not do this for you, since it does not intend to be your main
  event loop. @}
procedure SimulateBlockCursor; external
  name 'crt_SimulateBlockCursor';

@{ Makes the cursor simulated by SimulateBlockCursor disappear if it
  is active. Does nothing otherwise. You should call this procedure
  after using SimulateBlockCursor before doing any further CRT
  output (though failing to do so should not hurt except for
  possibly leaving the simulated cursor in its old position longer
  than it should). @}
procedure SimulateBlockCursorOff; external
  name 'crt_SimulateBlockCursorOff';

function  GetTextColor: Integer;
function  GetTextBackground: Integer;

@{ Write string at the given position without moving the cursor.
  Truncated at the right margin. @}
procedure WriteStrAt (x, y: Integer; const s: String; Attr:
  TTextAttr);

@{ Write (several copies of) a char at then given position without
  moving the cursor. Truncated at the right margin. @}
procedure WriteCharAt (x, y, Count: Integer; ch: Char; Attr:
  TTextAttr);

@{ Write characters with specified attributes at the given position
  without moving the cursor. Truncated at the right margin. @}
procedure WriteCharAttrAt (x, y, Count: CInteger; CharAttr:
  PCharAttrs); external name 'crt_WriteCharAttrAt';

@{ Write a char while moving the cursor @}
procedure WriteChar (ch: Char);

@{ Read a character from a screen position @}
procedure ReadChar (x, y: CInteger; var ch: Char; var Attr:
  TTextAttr); external name 'crt_ReadChar';

@{ Change only text attributes, leave characters. Truncated at the
  right margin. @}
procedure ChangeTextAttr (x, y, Count: Integer; NewAttr: TTextAttr);

@{ Fill current window @}
procedure FillWin (ch: Char; Attr: TTextAttr); external
  name 'crt_FillWin';

@{ Calculate size of memory required for ReadWin in current window. @}
function  WinSize: SizeType; external name 'crt_WinSize';

@{ Save window contents. Buf must be WinSize bytes large. @}
procedure ReadWin (var Buf); external name 'crt_ReadWin';

@{ Restore window contents saved by ReadWin. The size of the current
  window must match the size of the window from which ReadWin was
  used, but the position may be different. @}
procedure WriteWin (const Buf); external name 'crt_WriteWin';

type
  WinState = record
    x1, y1, x2, y2, WhereX, WhereY, NewX1, NewY1, NewX2, NewY2:
  Integer;
    TextAttr: TTextAttr;
    CursorShape: TCursorShape;
    ScreenSize: TPoint;
    Buffer: ^Byte
  end;

@{ Save window position and size, cursor position, text attribute and
  cursor shape -- *not* the window contents. @}
procedure SaveWin (var State: WinState);

@{ Make a new window (like Window), and save the contents of the
  screen below the window as well as the position and size, cursor
  position, text attribute and cursor shape of the old window. @}
procedure MakeWin (var State: WinState; x1, y1, x2, y2: Integer);

@{ Create window in full size, save previous text mode and all values
  that MakeWin does. @}
procedure SaveScreen (var State: WinState);

@{ Restore the data saved by SaveWin, MakeWin or SaveScreen. @}
procedure RestoreWin (var State: WinState);

@{ Panels @}

type
  TPanel = Pointer;

function  GetActivePanel: TPanel; external
  name 'crt_GetActivePanel';
procedure PanelNew                 (x1, y1, x2, y2: CInteger;
  BindToBackground: Boolean); external name 'crt_PanelNew';
procedure PanelDelete              (Panel: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelDelete';
procedure PanelBindToBackground    (Panel: TPanel; BindToBackground:
  Boolean); external name 'crt_PanelBindToBackground';
function  PanelIsBoundToBackground (Panel: TPanel): Boolean;
  external name 'crt_PanelIsBoundToBackground';
procedure PanelActivate            (Panel: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelActivate';
procedure PanelHide                (Panel: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelHide';
procedure PanelShow                (Panel: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelShow';
function  PanelHidden              (Panel: TPanel): Boolean;
  external name 'crt_PanelHidden';
procedure PanelTop                 (Panel: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelTop';
procedure PanelBottom              (Panel: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelBottom';
procedure PanelMoveAbove           (Panel, Above: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelMoveAbove';
procedure PanelMoveBelow           (Panel, Below: TPanel); external
  name 'crt_PanelMoveBelow';
function  PanelAbove               (Panel: TPanel): TPanel; external
  name 'crt_PanelAbove';
function  PanelBelow               (Panel: TPanel): TPanel; external
  name 'crt_PanelBelow';

@{ TPCRT compatibility @}

@{ Write a string at the given position without moving the cursor.
  Truncated at the right margin. @}
procedure WriteString (const s: String; y, x: Integer);

@{ Write a string at the given position with the given attribute
  without moving the cursor. Truncated at the right margin. @}
procedure FastWriteWindow (const s: String; y, x: Integer; Attr:
  TTextAttr);

@{ Write a string at the given absolute position with the given
 attribute without moving the cursor. Truncated at the right
  margin. @}
procedure FastWrite       (const s: String; y, x: Integer; Attr:
  TTextAttr);

@{ WinCRT compatibility @}

const
  cw_UseDefault = Integer ($8000);

var
  @{ Ignored @}
  WindowOrg : TPoint = (cw_UseDefault, cw_UseDefault);
  WindowSize: TPoint = (cw_UseDefault, cw_UseDefault);
  Origin    : TPoint = (0, 0);
  InactiveTitle: PChar = '(Inactive %s)';
  AutoTracking: Boolean = True;
  WindowTitle: @{$ifdef __BP_TYPE_SIZES__@}
               array [0 .. 79] of Char
               @{$else@}
               TStringBuf
               @{$endif@};

  @{ Cursor location, 0-based @}
  Cursor    : TPoint = (0, 0); attribute (name = 'crt_Cursor');

procedure InitWinCRT; attribute (name = 'crt_InitWinCRT');

@{ Halts the program @}
procedure DoneWinCRT; attribute (noreturn, name = 'crt_DoneWinCRT');

procedure WriteBuf (Buffer: PChar; Count: SizeType); attribute (name
  = 'crt_WriteBuf');

function  ReadBuf (Buffer: PChar; Count: SizeType): SizeType;
  attribute (name = 'crt_ReadBuf');

@{ 0-based coordinates! @}
procedure CursorTo (x, y: Integer); attribute (name
  = 'crt_CursorTo');

@{ Dummy @}
procedure ScrollTo (x, y: Integer); attribute (name
  = 'crt_ScrollTo');

@{ Dummy @}
procedure TrackCursor; attribute (name = 'crt_TrackCursor');

@end smallexample
